HAMLET. I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never acted, or
if it was, not above once, for the play, I remember, pleased not the
million, ’twas caviare to the general. But it was—as I received it, and
others, whose judgments in such matters cried in the top of mine—an
excellent play, well digested in the scenes, set down with as much
modesty as cunning. I remember one said there were no sallets in the
lines to make the matter savoury, nor no matter in the phrase that
might indite the author of affectation, but called it an honest method,
as wholesome as sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine. One
speech in it, I chiefly loved. ’Twas Aeneas’ tale to Dido, and
thereabout of it especially where he speaks of Priam’s slaughter. If it
live in your memory, begin at this line, let me see, let me see: _The
rugged Pyrrhus, like th’ Hyrcanian beast,—_ It is not so: it begins
with Pyrrhus— _The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms, Black as his
purpose, did the night resemble When he lay couched in the ominous
horse, Hath now this dread and black complexion smear’d With heraldry
more dismal. Head to foot Now is he total gules, horridly trick’d With
blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons, Bak’d and impasted with the
parching streets, That lend a tyrannous and a damned light To their
vile murders. Roasted in wrath and fire, And thus o’ersized with
coagulate gore, With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus Old
grandsire Priam seeks._ So, proceed you.

POLONIUS. ’Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good
discretion.

FIRST PLAYER. _Anon he finds him, Striking too short at Greeks. His
antique sword, Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls, Repugnant to
command. Unequal match’d, Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes
wide; But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword Th’unnerved father
falls. Then senseless Ilium, Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming
top Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash Takes prisoner
Pyrrhus’ ear. For lo, his sword, Which was declining on the milky head
Of reverend Priam, seem’d i’ th’air to stick. So, as a painted tyrant,
Pyrrhus stood, And like a neutral to his will and matter, Did nothing.
But as we often see against some storm, A silence in the heavens, the
rack stand still, The bold winds speechless, and the orb below As hush
as death, anon the dreadful thunder Doth rend the region; so after
Pyrrhus’ pause, Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work, And never did
the Cyclops’ hammers fall On Mars’s armour, forg’d for proof eterne,
With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword Now falls on Priam. Out,
out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods, In general synod, take away
her power; Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel, And bowl
the round nave down the hill of heaven, As low as to the fiends._

POLONIUS. This is too long.

HAMLET. It shall to the barber’s, with your beard.—Prythee say on. He’s
for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps. Say on; come to Hecuba.

FIRST PLAYER. _But who, O who, had seen the mobled queen,—_

HAMLET. ‘The mobled queen’?

POLONIUS. That’s good! ‘Mobled queen’ is good.

FIRST PLAYER. _Run barefoot up and down, threat’ning the flames With
bisson rheum. A clout upon that head Where late the diadem stood, and
for a robe, About her lank and all o’erteemed loins, A blanket, in
th’alarm of fear caught up— Who this had seen, with tongue in venom
steep’d, ’Gainst Fortune’s state would treason have pronounc’d. But if
the gods themselves did see her then, When she saw Pyrrhus make
malicious sport In mincing with his sword her husband’s limbs, The
instant burst of clamour that she made,— Unless things mortal move them
not at all,— Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven, And
passion in the gods._

POLONIUS. Look, where he has not turn’d his colour, and has tears in’s
eyes. Pray you, no more.

HAMLET. ’Tis well. I’ll have thee speak out the rest of this soon.—Good
my lord, will you see the players well bestowed? Do you hear, let them
be well used; for they are the abstracts and brief chronicles of the
time. After your death you were better have a bad epitaph than their
ill report while you live.

POLONIUS. My lord, I will use them according to their desert.

HAMLET. God’s bodikin, man, better. Use every man after his desert, and
who should scape whipping? Use them after your own honour and dignity.
The less they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty. Take them in.

POLONIUS. Come, sirs.

HAMLET. Follow him, friends. We’ll hear a play tomorrow.

 [_Exeunt Polonius with all the Players but the First._]

Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can you play _The Murder of Gonzago_?

FIRST PLAYER. Ay, my lord.

HAMLET. We’ll ha’t tomorrow night. You could for a need study a speech
of some dozen or sixteen lines, which I would set down and insert in’t,
could you not?

FIRST PLAYER. Ay, my lord.

HAMLET. Very well. Follow that lord, and look you mock him not.

 [_Exit First Player._]

[_To Rosencrantz and Guildenstern_] My good friends, I’ll leave you
till night. You are welcome to Elsinore.

ROSENCRANTZ. Good my lord.

 [_Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern._]

HAMLET. Ay, so, God b’ wi’ ye. Now I am alone. O what a rogue and
peasant slave am I! Is it not monstrous that this player here, But in a
fiction, in a dream of passion, Could force his soul so to his own
conceit That from her working all his visage wan’d; Tears in his eyes,
distraction in’s aspect, A broken voice, and his whole function suiting
With forms to his conceit? And all for nothing! For Hecuba? What’s
Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba, That he should weep for her? What would
he do, Had he the motive and the cue for passion That I have? He would
drown the stage with tears And cleave the general ear with horrid
speech; Make mad the guilty, and appal the free, Confound the ignorant,
and amaze indeed, The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I, A dull
and muddy-mettled rascal, peak Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my
cause, And can say nothing. No, not for a king Upon whose property and
most dear life A damn’d defeat was made. Am I a coward? Who calls me
villain, breaks my pate across? Plucks off my beard and blows it in my
face? Tweaks me by the nose, gives me the lie i’ th’ throat As deep as
to the lungs? Who does me this? Ha! ’Swounds, I should take it: for it
cannot be But I am pigeon-liver’d, and lack gall To make oppression
bitter, or ere this I should have fatted all the region kites With this
slave’s offal. Bloody, bawdy villain! Remorseless, treacherous,
lecherous, kindless villain! Oh vengeance! Why, what an ass am I! This
is most brave, That I, the son of a dear father murder’d, Prompted to
my revenge by heaven and hell, Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with
words And fall a-cursing like a very drab, A scullion! Fie upon’t! Foh!
About, my brain! I have heard That guilty creatures sitting at a play,
Have by the very cunning of the scene, Been struck so to the soul that
presently They have proclaim’d their malefactions. For murder, though
it have no tongue, will speak With most miraculous organ. I’ll have
these players Play something like the murder of my father Before mine
uncle. I’ll observe his looks; I’ll tent him to the quick. If he but
blench, I know my course. The spirit that I have seen May be the devil,
and the devil hath power T’assume a pleasing shape, yea, and perhaps
Out of my weakness and my melancholy, As he is very potent with such
spirits, Abuses me to damn me. I’ll have grounds More relative than
this. The play’s the thing Wherein I’ll catch the conscience of the
King.

 [_Exit._]